Bureau Refugees Freedmen and Abandoned Lands
Headquarters Asst. Comm. DC
Washington. April 15th 1868

Brt. Brig. Gen. C.H. Howard
Asst. Comm. DC
General.

Referring to the complaints of freedpeople at Freedmens Village, Va., I have the honor to submit the following report after a careful personal investigation.

1st. Ann Gresham complains that she does not receive wages as promised, that her stove was taken from her. Ann is about fifty eight years old and has been classed as a dependent for three years past. She, in common with other dependents, is required to work what she is able. In my opinion she is not capable of earning enough to provide for herself and consequently I cannot recommend that wages be paid her. She states and says she can prove that she carried to Freedmen’s Village a stove that cost her $7.50, that said stove was taken away from the former Assistant Superintendent condemned and sold, that she was given a government stove in place thereof. I have no doubt that Lieut. Bergevin, the officer that changed the stoves, had receipted to his predecessor for the one she claimed as governmental property and was therefore responsible for it. I would recommend however that if she can establish the truth of her statement, a stove of equal value be issued to her.

She had made complaint regarding her stove and wages to Dr. Howard.

Kate Feldman and Jane Richardson were absent. I am informed that they are young women.

Julia Hill was absent.

Samuel Hall complains of insufficiency of clothing and refusal of Dr. Howard to issue him what is necessary. He appeared before me comfortably clad, said he has (3) three coats, (3) three pairs trousers, (1) one jacket, (3) three shirts, and (1) pair of drawers. I do not think he is suffering for want of clothing. He has a wife and babe, all dependent on the government for support. When admitted to the village about a year since, he was crippled and has been unable to work ever since, but is now nearly recovered from his injuries and should go out to earn his own support as soon as able.

In regard to the insufficiency of foods. A large number of the dependents, among which are all named above, live in detached houses, each family separately, to these uncooked rations are issued, according to the number in family, for five days at a time. By wasteful cooking, enter testament [?] of visitors and friends from the city or elsewhere, and perhaps other improper uses, the rations are exhausted before the time for a new issue. A due regard for the interests of the government (but not forgetting the real necessities of these dependent people) will not permit a less economical issue of subsistence than at present. I am confirmed in these opinions by the fact that the same relative quality and quantity of rations are cooked and placed upon the table in the Home building and are found ample, there being no complaint of insufficiency of food among the regular inmates, who receive their rations in this way, which issued above stated leave the recipients hungry and dissatisfied.

I would therefore earnestly recommend that the system of issuing raw rations to separate families to be abandoned as early as practicable, and that kitchens and dining rooms of sufficient capacity be provided to accommodate all the permanent dependents with cooked meals at regular hours. A faithful application of this plan would in my judgment benefit the people and be less expensive than the present system.

Signed G.W. Clark, Inspector
