Bureau Refugees Freedmen and Abandoned Lands
Office Local Superintendent DC
Washington DC June 25th 1868

Major,

In compliance with Special Order no. 44, dated… June 19, 1868 [ordering] a board for the investigation of Freedmen’s Village Va. We have inspected the said Freedmen’s Village and carried out to the best of our ability… and have the honor to submit the following report…

We find that there are now at Freedmen’s Village, including all classes of colored people, Men 262, Women 362 and Children 246 under 14 years of age. Total 870. Of this number there are 160 Men, 215 Women, and 123 Children (so called dependents) Total 498 of the number of dependents we find 15 men and 33 women (with 25? Children) able to work, for names and condition see accompanying list… also 7 Orphan children 12 years of age able to work… Also of this number 4 men, 10 women, Total 14 should be immediately expelled from the Village…

There are however 143 Men, 167 Women and 91? Children unable to support themselves and are really dependents from various reasons, i.e. [illegible], crippled or imbeciles, there are however amongst this class of people many who although crippled so as to incapacitate them for much manual labor, yet they should on account of the number of them take the place of another class of people at the Village.

The colored employees, who number with their families 89 (of which 36 are men, 31 women, and 22 children under 14 years of age), [illegible] of this number are regular employees whose pay amounts to $393 monthly. All the work done by these men and women could be performed by the dependents, and we have the honor respectfully to recommend that at least 25 of these employees be discharged and that their places by those dependents who can perform light duties without pay, at least $250 per month can be saved in wages, besides the rations for the families of the employees… Every member of these families are healthy and able bodied, the dependents will be much better off by performing some light duties daily, in fact there is no work about the Village that the dependents cannot do.

There is yet another class of so called dependents, very old men crippled from various causes, and in some cases blind, who have young and healthy wives with from 1 to 4 children under 12 years of age. Many of these parties have been married while at the Village and are now raising families of children; this kind of marriage should not be allowed, as in most cases a middle aged woman married an old cripple or blind man to get a home and rations for herself and her children, thinking as they are free to say that the Government will not separate their family, and as the old man cannot work, the wife is certain of a home, plenty to eat and nothing to do. Such women should either be put to work in the Home, Hospital, Wash House, and Cook House or at once be put out of the Village. Of the grand total there are 75 men, 78 women and 106 children under 14 years of age… who are called renters, but very few of whom have paid rent for many months. They are in the main an indolent and impudent class of people, who work just enough to provide daily foods, this is the class of persons who are foremost in all turmoils and we are satisfied was the cause of the recent trouble at the Village. All this class of people are ‘able bodied’ and should be ordered from the Village, and we have the honor respectfully to recommend that 20 tenement houses occupied by this class of people be razed… but two classes of people allowed to remain in Freedmen’s Village, i.e. ‘Dependents’ and those who rent grounds for farming, no idle persons should be suffered to remain, this cannot be done unless a number of the tenements are razed, for so long as a vacant tenement remains such people will work into them, and so long as they remain will there be turmoil, dissatisfaction, and adultery, without them the families who are industrious (and quiet people) and the superannuated, crippled, and imbeciled (dependents) will be orderly and happy.

In conclusion we would recommend that means be taken for securing homes for these children and their mothers, but whose mothers are dependent upon the Government, the interest of both mother and child demand this and will be promoted, the government also relieved of an unnecessary burden.

We are also of the opinion that the continuation of Freedmen’s Village for an indefinite time as a home for dependent freedmen is not an absolute necessity, as the number of actual dependents are but 389, which number could be reduced by removing the cause of dependency of many. In comparison with freedmen of Washington D.C. who were once considered dependent, but who now receive no assistance from the government other than Medical, the dependents of Freedmen’s Village as a class are in no way less capacitated to sustain themselves. To alleviate some of the disabilities under which the village is now laboring, we would suggest that the residence of the Superintendent be located in the village, the duties of the Medical officers of the day be so modified as not to require him to render medical assistance to any persons living outside of the Village, and that no persons be allowed to receive rations who are not absolutely dependent, except to such other ‘dependents’ that may take the places of the present employees.
