
Bureau Refugees Freedmen and Abandoned Lands
Headquarters Asst. Comm. DC
Washington. October 31st 1866

Brt. Brig. General C.H. Howard

General
In accordance with instructions contained in circular letter dated… October 10th, 1866, I have the honor to make the following report: ...

(pages 6 and 7 of 7)

The colored persons to whom land has been rented the past season have with a few exceptions, cultivated the land well and raised good crops; and those who have been industrious in earning what they could, when not engaged on their land will have sufficient to make their families comfortable for the winter. The other people of the village and vicinity have, most of them dependent upon jobs of work here and there, and as there has not been employment for all, there are many who have secured but a scanty living through the summer, and have nothing laid up for the coming winter.

Among the dependents are many women with children; most of these women are able to work, but are living here on a scanty ration in idleness and rags, because they cannot, on account of their children and the severity of work, get employment in this vicinity.

The number of inmates of the ‘home’ for the old and infirm has greatly increased, many having been sent here from various places. They are generally comfortably provided for and clothing is being made to satisfy the needy.

The number of deaths in the village and vicinity, has been unusually small and there has been very little sickness except chills and fever, which has been very prevalent for the last few months.

Habits of immorality and a disregard of lawful marriage (the result of their former condition) is still prevalent among them, as is shown by several instances of those contemplating marriage, living together as husband and wife before having the necessary rite performed. In such cases I have required the parties to get married forthwith, but think some more stringent measures should be taken to entirely break up the practice. There are several women here dependents who are raising children without husbands, some of them having been here for two or three years, following the lame course of life. Some remedy should be found for this evil.

The punishment for offences has been confinement in the guard house, and some have been ordered to leave the village.

A.A. Lawrence
